
Develop a factory manager (agent) for the SCM world
---------------------------------------------------

This tutorial describes how to develop an agent for the SCM world, test
it, and submit it to the ANAC 2019 SCM league.

The first step is to install negmas

.. code:: bash

    pip install negmas

Once you have this library installed, you can start developing your
factory manager:

.. code:: ipython3

    from negmas.apps.scml import FactoryManager
    
    class MyFactoryManager(FactoryManager):
        """My factory manager"""

Try to make an object of your newly created factory manager. We will
fail, do not panic:

.. code:: ipython3

    try:
        incorrect = FactoryManager()
    except TypeError as e:
        print(e)


.. parsed-literal::

    Can't instantiate abstract class FactoryManager with abstract methods on_negotiation_request


You are told that you cannot instantiate your newly created class as did
not implement the abstract (required) method ``on_negotiation_request``.
That is actually the ONLY abstract method you need to implement.

.. code:: ipython3

    class MyFactoryManager(FactoryManager):
        """My factory manager"""
        
        def on_negotiation_request(self, cfp: "CFP", partner: str):
            return None

As the
`documentation <http://www.yasserm.com/negmas/negmas.apps.scml.html?highlight=on_negotiation_request#negmas.apps.scml.SCMLAgent.on_negotiation_request>`__
states, this function is called whenever your factory manager receives a
request from another agent to negotiate. You can either return ``None``
if you do not want to accept this negotiation or create a ``Negotiator``
that represents your agent in it.

Your do-nothing agent is almost ready. Let's try it:

.. code:: ipython3

    from negmas.apps.scml.utils import anac2019_world
    from negmas.apps.scml import GreedyFactoryManager
    
    world = anac2019_world(competitors=(MyFactoryManager, GreedyFactoryManager), n_steps=10, n_greedy_per_level=5
                          , n_factories_per_level=11, n_intermediate=3
                          , default_signing_delay=0, max_storage=1000000
                          , max_insurance_premium=100, n_retrials=5)

You have now a world with the settings for ANAC 2019 competition. Let's
run it

.. code:: ipython3

    world.run()

What just happened?

.. code:: ipython3

    world.winners




.. parsed-literal::

    [greedy_4_19]



The property ``stats`` in ``World`` gives you several statistics about
the world for every time-step of the simulation.

Let's try to run a tournament with this do-nothing agent against the
built-in greedy agent:

.. code:: ipython3

    from negmas.apps.scml.utils import anac2019_tournament
    
    results = anac2019_tournament(competitors=(MyFactoryManager, GreedyFactoryManager)
                                  , n_runs=4, n_steps=10, parallelism='serial')


::


    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-36-47b7de9ab07d> in <module>
          2 
          3 results = anac2019_tournament(competitors=(MyFactoryManager, GreedyFactoryManager)
    ----> 4                               , n_runs=4, n_steps=10, parallelism='serial')
    

    ~/code/projects/negmas/negmas/apps/scml/utils.py in anac2019_tournament(competitors, randomize, n_runs, tournament_path, total_timeout, parallelism, scheduler_ip, scheduler_port, n_intermediate, n_miners, n_factories_per_level, n_consumers, n_lines_per_factory, guaranteed_contracts, use_consumer, max_insurance_premium, n_retrials, negotiator_type, transportation_delay, default_signing_delay, max_storage, consumption_horizon, consumption, negotiation_speed, neg_time_limit, neg_n_steps, n_steps, time_limit, n_greedy_per_level, name)
        255     if randomize:
        256         for i in range(n_runs):
    --> 257             shuffle(competitors)
        258             world_name = unique_name(f'{i:05}', add_time=True, rand_digits=4)
        259             dir_name = tournament_path / world_name


    ~/.local/share/virtualenvs/negmas-bNSbQ2CL/lib/python3.6/random.py in shuffle(self, x, random)
        273                 # pick an element in x[:i+1] with which to exchange x[i]
        274                 j = randbelow(i+1)
    --> 275                 x[i], x[j] = x[j], x[i]
        276         else:
        277             _int = int


    TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment


You can see the scores that each individual factory manager got:

.. code:: ipython3

    results.scores

You can also check the total scores for each factory manager type:

.. code:: ipython3

    results.total_scores

If you want, you can check if these differences are statistically
significant using a t-test:

.. code:: ipython3

    results.ttest

So the greedy factory manager is better than the do-nothing factory
manager getting a total score of 2878 compared with only 367 for the
do-nothing factory manager. Moreover, this difference is statistically
significant as the p-value is 0.041 < 0.05.

Or, let's just find out who was the winner:

.. code:: ipython3

    results.winner

and what was its to score:

.. code:: ipython3

    results.winner_score

Now, you completed the development of your factory manager, tested it by
running it in worlds and tournaments, what exactly should you do to
participate in the SCM league @ ANAC 2019:

You need to submit the following items:

-  Names of all members of the team with their affiliations and email
   addresses
-  Either a single python file with the whole implementation of your
   agent with any supporting code or a zip file with a single folder
   containing your code. In the later case, you will need to indicate
   the class name of your factory manager. Any factory manager names are
   accepted except (Insurance, Bank, MFactoryManager, CFactoryManager).
-  A 2-pages academic report about your factory manager. Please check
   the submission website for details about this report.

That is it folks! You can now start developing your own factory manager.
Have fun.



Download :download:`Notebook<notebooks/07.develop_scml_agent.ipynb>`.


